h1. Introduction

XmlTools is a small set of utility methods that make working with xml a lot less tedious in Java. Often
picking apart xml content in Java involves a lot of boiler plate code related to handling io streams, encodings,
configuring a parser, configuring an xpath processor, exception handling, etc.

Additionally, a lot of these things can benefit from
reusing instances. For example, xpath expressions are more expensive to instantiate than to use and you can reuse them
but they are not thread safe. Likewise, you can reuse DocumentBuilder instances.

This library offers a handful of classes. The most important one is XPathBrowser which implements an xpath based
mechanism to browse a dom tree much like you would browse a file system.

The reason I open sourced this code is that I got tired of recreating code like this for work over and over again. I actually developed an early version of this code years ago and have been sort of copying it from project to project.

h1. Features

* XMLTools allow for one line calls to parse a String, Reader or InputStream.
** Reuses DocumentBuilder instances
* XPathBrowser class that allows you to work with xpath expressions in a sane way
** Supports caching of xpath expressions so you can reuse them efficiently. The cache is a LRU cache that will evict least recently used entries additionally entries that are not used for a while will be removed as well. See known issues below.
** Supports really compact code that does what you want/expect
** Handles namespaces somewhat sensibly to allow for writing namespace neutral xpath expressions (see known issues below).
* ValidXMLCharacterFilterReader that can be used to filter illegal characters from content before you parse it. This is great for dealing with content with minor encoding errors where dropping the problematic characters is a better solution than failing to parse.
* BlobIteratoble class that allows you to iterate over a large file and work on blob clearly marked with a begin and end token. This is useful for e.g. processing large files such as the entire wikipedia xml file (10 GB) and processing each wikipedia entry with the XPathBrowser.
* Battle tested. I've used this code (or a predecessor of it) for several years in different projects. It's fast enough that I've used it for batch processing large amounts of xml, parsing input in rest APIs in production servers, or simply picking apart API responses in tests, custom tools, and other projects.

h1. Usage

Given some xml:

<pre>
<code>
<root>
    <string>foo</string>
    <double>0.42</double>
    <long>42</long>
    <bool>True</bool>
    <list>
        <item>1</item>
        <item>2</item>
    </list>
</root>
</code>
</pre>

You can do cool stuff like this using the builder pattern:
<pre>
<code>
// Browse an xml document using the XPathBrowser
// can take a string, input stream, reader, or dom node
XPathBrowser xp = XPathBrowser.browse(xml);

// There are methods for extracting String, int, long, double, boolean and it is easy to add more if ever needed.
// you can use cd to navigate the dom tree and then use relative xpath expressions against that node or just access
// the node value directly.
long l = xp.cd("/root/long").getLong();

// this works as well
l = xp.getLong("/root/long");

// or this way you can work with any dom node and use relative xpaths against that node
Node n = xp.getFirstNode("/root");
l = xp.getLong(n,"/long");

// or you can do it like this
xp.cd("/root");
xp.getLong("/long");

// you can easily iterate over node lists
for(XPathBrowser x: xp.cd("/root/list").ls()) {
    System.out.println(x.getString();
}

// or just get the NodeList straight from the dom
NodeList l = xp.getNodeList("/root/list");


// if you have a big file with &lt;page&gt; .... &lt;/page&gt; objects, you can process it like this
// without running out of memory
for(String page: new BlobIterable(inputStream, "&lt;page&gt;", "&lt;/page&gt;") {
    xp = XPathBrowser.browse(page);
    ...
}

</code>
</pre>

The XPathBrowser class contains many more methods that allow you to pick apart the xml in a way that is reasonably performant and allows for minimum amounts of boiler plate. Different styles of using are supported. The builder/file system way is convenient but you can mix and match different approaches.

Take a look at the unit tests for an idea of what else this code can do.


h1. Known issues

These are issues that I'm aware of that I haven't yet gotten around to addressing. They haven't really blocked me in using this.

h2. XPath expression Caching

XPathExpressions are much more expensive to create than to use and there is considerable benefit to reusing the instances. However, they are not thread safe and you should be careful to not use them concurrently. To make this easy, the XPathBrowser uses a thread local with a per thread LRU cache for xpath expressions. This can put quite a bit of strain on the memory and you need to trade off memory usage and performance here if you choose to tune the defaults this library uses. By default, the cache will keep a modest amount of expressions in the cache evicting them based on the least recently used mechanism or after 15 minutes of not being used. In a system with many threads, the amount of cached expressions can accumulate and you need to be careful in that case.

h2. Namespaces are a bit flaky

By default, the XPathBrowser will sort of handle namespaces and it will allow you to use namespace free xpath expressions for some things against namespaced xml. However, there are cases where it doesn't work reliable. I've actually resorted to doing a string replace to get rid of namespaces on one occasion and this is a nice workaround but it comes at a slight performance penalty of course.

h1. Installation

It's a maven project. So, checking it out and doing a mvn clean install should do the trick.

Alternatively, you can exercise your rights under the license and simply copy and adapt. The "license":https://github.com/jillesvangurp/xmltools/blob/master/LICENSE allows you to do this and I have no problems with this.

If you like to use pre-built jars, you can utilize my private maven repository as explained "here":http://www.jillesvangurp.com/2013/02/27/maven-and-my-github-projects/

Should anyone like this licensed differently, please contact me.

If anyone wants to fix stuff just send me a pull request.

h1. Changelog

* 1.3
** First maven central release; refactored to have io.inbot package
* 1.2
** Mostly documentation fixes
* 1.1
** Added BlobIterable, replaced the caching for xpath expressions with a guava based LRU cache
* 1.0
** First release of XMLTools
